# Artist's Statement

**1) What are the social justice intentions of your piece? Specifically, what do you want people to think, feel, and do after seeing (or experiencing) what you created?**
   
Privileged individuals tend to overestimate scientific capabilities, taking for granted that 
illnesses they have not experienced throughout the course of their own lives are rare or even eradicated, rather than simply less common in their region. Through engaging with my piece, I encourage individuals to explore how the global burden of disease is distributed, particularly in areas outside the scope of their immediate experiences or travels. After the fact, I hope that people will reflect upon the varying perceptions and realities of what ailments are ‘normal’ in their communities, compared to elsewhere in the world. Depending on one’s background, this may be uncomfortable; acknowledging that some people contend with serious, overlapping conditions while others worry about comparatively minor illnesses can be guilt-inducing. Likewise, it may be unsettling to recognize that many well-resourced countries do not face the endemic diseases characteristic of everyday life elsewhere. It is crucial to embrace this discomfort and grapple with it. Many of the most widespread and impactful health conditions are also highly treatable; by illuminating disparities in global health, I hope to inspire passion and commitment to improving quality of life and mitigating the burden of disease. Despite the scale of the problem, we can make change by leveraging our personal resources; whether through donating time or money to NGOs, supporting education initiatives, or engaging in public health advocacy, there are numerous ways to make a difference.

**2) Why is it necessary to take action on this issue?**
I chose to focus my project on this subject because it is jarring how uninformed people in this region are about the health realities faced by most others in the world. It is important to make people aware that health conditions which seem abstract or anachronistic are in fact still prevalent today. Soil-transmitted helminthiasis is the most common neglected tropical disease, infecting more than a quarter of the world’s population and causing severe clinical illness in about 300 million people.[1,2] These infections are caused by inadequate access to clean water and sanitation facilities, severely impacting overall health, quality of life, and nutritional status.[1,2,3,4] Often co-occurring with other poverty-related conditions like diarrheal diseases, they exacerbate each other’s effects.[1,2] However, their interconnected nature also offers a valuable opportunity for intervention: targeting one may also lead to inadvertent improvement in others, due to their overlapping risk factors.[3,4] 

**3) From an artistic (or aesthetic) perspective, what choices did you make to increase the impact of your piece?**
The profundity of data is frequently undermined by the method of its delivery. This is particularly true in the case of data visualization, which does a severe disservice to the areas of study it seeks to serve. The opposite of this is also true; the principles of visual design embody the coalescence of information science and art, allowing us to present data in ways that do not just inform, but inspire. Employing global health and cartographic data, I used Python’s Vega-Altair library to create interactive visualizations, empowering the user to explore the current global disease landscape.[5,6] I wanted to equip users with the tools for autonomous data exploration, fostering curiosity in the subject. Designing a few visualizations that achieve an appropriate balance between capturing the essence of the data and not overwhelming the user was critical.

**4) How have you and/or how will you share your piece with others?**
 The piece I created is accessible online as a web page. I have shared it with friends and family, and hope its user base will continue to grow!
